[WIP] Document guidelines for saving or submitting data (#209)
primer/design: content/ui-patterns/saving.mdx

When defining these calls to actions, make sure to:
1. Keep the text as succinct and clear as possible
2. Add the item’s name to the button text in cases where it may be unclear to the user what is being changed

![Screenshot of the 'Create a new repository' form](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868902-a8514e84-5cd4-4081-b13d-46f00f404625.png)

### Placement

Save buttons should be placed somewhere intuitive and easily accessible. If all of the fields save automatically, do not include a save button. This makes it unclear when data is being saved.

Default to placing the submit button at the bottom right of the form. In cases where this is an unintuitive placement, explore other positions to place the button.
<img width="1790" alt="Screenshot of the 'Edit repository details' form" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868909-71f72f1a-eafc-4777-a639-96d81b33eebb.png">

{/*
TODO:
Consider how we might define more patterns to keep the "Save" button easily accessible on long forms:
- add save and cancel buttons on top AND bottom?
- use a sticky header with save and cancel buttons?
*/}

> If a save button is used to save an inline edit to the input or inputs where the change was made.

Author: This was a typo. It should be something like:

> If a save button is used to save an inline edit, place it close to the input where the change was made.

---

That wording could still use a little help, so I'll spend some more time on it.

![Screen recording of a user editing a PR's title](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868914-6af36067-39a6-4fec-adb9-518c5abd595d.gif)

It's strongly recommended to have a single save button for all of the inputs on the page. If you're designing a page with pieces of content that can be separately toggled into an edit mode (such as editing an issue title), only allow one edit mode toggled on at a time so that only one save button is visible. When there is on save button per section of a page or form, users may be confused about whether the save button will save all of the inputs or just the subset of the inputs. This confusion is even more likely for visually impaired users because they can't see if each save button is visually grouped with a set of inputs.

{/* 
TODO: find an example of this, mock one up (if that's allowed), or exclude this visual example

![🖼 Include a DO example with image to reinforce message]()
*/}

{/* TODO: reference the case where there's a declaratively saved form on a page with inherently saved inputs (such as user Profile settings) */}

### State

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button if the form is invalid or has not been changed. The only time the save button should be disabled is in cases where you need to prevent the user from taking further action while the request completes (such as updating notification preferences). In these cases, disable the save button and the form inputs. While the form is disabled, update the save button's label with the present continuous form of the action's verb (for example, "Save" becomes "Saving...", "Follow" becomes "Following...") to indicate that they shouldn't navigate away from the current page which may cause the request to fail silently in the event of an error. In most cases, these actions should take minimal time, but in cases where it takes longer than normal, this clear indication is invaluable.

Author: Thanks for the context. I'll hold off on this for now.

![Screenshot of a CTA label that changes from "Update" to "Updating..."](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868916-ea209d7c-136e-4f6a-a1b0-51d1e54faf46.png)

## Explicit saving
An explicit save does not apply changes until the user explicitly takes an action to submit the changes.

> If you're designing a form, start with an explicit saving pattern. Avoid mixing paradigms on a single page with multiple forms, and never mix paradigms in a single form. For example: if I upload a profile photo in the "Public profile" form, that change should not be saved until I explicitly submit the whole form.

Author: Good call - "patterns" is simpler and clearer. I also think that "**implicit** save patterns" could be phrased more simply. In the documentation, I refer to implicit save as "automatic save".

If there was an error saving the data, the user's data should be preserved in the form and they should be given [feedback](#feedback) about the failure.

{/*
TODO: determine if we should include the following guidance:

If a user tries to navigate away from a page with an unsaved form, we should warn them that their changes will be lost.
*/}

### Declarative inputs

When designing a form that is saved explicitly, use the following inputs:
- Text inputs
- Checkbox groups
- Radio button groups

> - Dropdown menus

Author: Yea, we could be more specific here.

Instead of listing all the possible kinds of dropdowns ([ActionMenu](https://primer.style/react/storybook?path=/story/composite-components-actionmenu2--simple-list-story), [SelectPanel](https://primer.style/react/storybook?path=/story/composite-components-selectpanel--multi-select-story), [DropdownMenu](https://primer.style/react/storybook?path=/story/composite-components-dropdownmenu2--simple-dropdown-menu)), this summary could cover everything:
```suggestion
- Browser-native `<select>` dropdown menus
- Custom dropdown menus that allow multiple selections
```

To maintain consistent interaction patterns across your app, do not use toggle switches or segmented controls in an explicitly saved form. They should only be used when they automatically change based on user input.

## Automatic saving

Automatic saving applies changes as they are made.

Automatic saving should be used when the user expects instant feedback from the change they made. Changes should only be saved automatically using[imperitive inputs](#imperitive-inputs) and for individual settings that are not changed via separate flows.

If a field is saved automatically, it should be obvious whether or not it saved without using text or visual indicators. A visual indicator for a field that has been "saved" or has an error "error" could be mistaken as a validation status.

> ![Screen recording of a user changing their theme in the 'Appearance' settings tab](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868921-afc2b8b8-e39f-478f-b17d-398b790bda89.gif)

Author: Yea, the screenshot examples are problematic. Instead of doing screenshots, I'm going to mock up very targeted examples.

> ![Screen recording of a user changing their theme in the 'Appearance' settings tab](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868921-afc2b8b8-e39f-478f-b17d-398b790bda89.gif)

Reviewer: Let me know if you want help to mock those up

### Imperitive inputs

When user input is automatically saved, use the following inputs:
- Toggle switches
- Segmented controls

> - Single-select dropdowns

Author: > If you've got a legit single select menu, like the watch menu, then that wouldn't need a save button

This is the case I was talking about, but I see how that's not clear here.

You were spot-on with your example. We wouldn't want to automatically save a dropdown selection if it's part of a form with a save button.

These inputs are designed to reduce UI by giving instant feedback. The toggle switch behaves like a light switch: the light just switches on and off without you having to confirm each time you flip the switch. Segmented controls and single-select dropdowns behave like a soda machine: the soda comes out as soon as you press the buttons without you confirming which soda you wanted.

To build an accessible and consistent app, do not automatically save declarative inputs.

### Inputs that are problematic for autosaving:

> **Text inputs**

Author: Yes, absolutely.

> **Text inputs**

Reviewer: Yes I believe so

- Users are expecting to set a value and then submit
- Sensitive information could be unintentionally submitted. For example: a change password input

**Checkbox groups**
- It could be unclear whether or not their selections have been saved
- Users may accidentally submit a selection that they clicked by accident

**Radio button groups**
Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them. This could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

> **Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns**

Reviewer: This also happens on macs too. We should clarify in our implicit and explicit input examples.

On Windows, a select dropdown has a similar problem as a radio button group. 
Options are selected when a user focuses the select and uses their arrow keys to read through each option

## Feedback

> If the change may not be obvious in the UI within the user's viewport, provide feedback to let the user know that the change occurred successfully. If the change occured without a redirect or page refresh, you could use a toast message. If the change occured and the page refreshes or redirects, you could use a flash banner message.

Reviewer: We might have to not recommend toast messages until we fix the accessibility issues.

Author: Are the accessibility issues caused by the frontend implementation? Or are we designing with toasts in a way that is not accessible?

If it's just about the frontend implementation, we could keep the guidance but add a note that toasts should be avoided until we fix them.

> <img width="1787" alt="Screenshot of the user's activity feed page with a flash banner confirming that a repository has been deleted" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868934-b96e6d9d-d022-433f-87ab-189baf1776fa.png">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img width="1787" alt="Flash banner on activity feed page confirming a successful repository deletion" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868934-b96e6d9d-d022-433f-87ab-189baf1776fa.png">
```

If an imperitive input did not automatically save, show an error message that explains why the change wasn't saved.

{/*
TODO: find an example of this, mock one up (if that's allowed), or exclude this visual example

![🖼 Include a DO example with image to reinforce message]()
*/}

## Error forgiveness

For risky changes, provide an option to "undo" after saving.

> ![Screenshot of a user hovering the 'Revert' button after merging a PR](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150870681-349185eb-342a-49f2-a7d3-6e58132e86a0.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Mouse cursor hovering over the 'Revert' button after merging a PR](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150870681-349185eb-342a-49f2-a7d3-6e58132e86a0.png)
```

Before submitting a form with very dangerous consequences (for example, delete a repository), ask the to user confirm they want to submit the form.

> ![Screen recording of a user confirming that they want to delete a repository](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868926-f99d23f6-6e31-4333-9545-2625451dae99.gif)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![User flow of a user confirming that they want to delete a repository](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868926-f99d23f6-6e31-4333-9545-2625451dae99.gif)
```

{/*
TODO:
Consider how we might define more patterns to keep the "Save" button easily accessible on long forms:
- add save and cancel buttons on top AND bottom?
- use a sticky header with save and cancel buttons?
*/}

If a save button is used to save an inline edit to the input or inputs where the change was made.
![Screen recording of a user editing a PR's title](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868914-6af36067-39a6-4fec-adb9-518c5abd595d.gif)

It's strongly recommended to have a single save button for all of the inputs on the page. If you're designing a page with pieces of content that can be separately toggled into an edit mode (such as editing an issue title), only allow one edit mode toggled on at a time so that only one save button is visible. When there is on save button per section of a page or form, users may be confused about whether the save button will save all of the inputs or just the subset of the inputs. This confusion is even more likely for visually impaired users because they can't see if each save button is visually grouped with a set of inputs.

{/* 

> TODO: find an example of this, mock one up (if that's allowed), or exclude this visual example

Author: Any ideas for _good_ examples of a form with subsection that gets submitted with a "Save" button, and a separate subsection that automatically saves?

The closest thing I could find was the Codespaces settings - you have to explicitly click "save" for one section, but the rest automatically save.

Author: Ignore this comment. I'm going to be replacing all screenshots with mockups that demonstrate the issue in isolation.

- Users may accidentally submit a selection that they clicked by accident

**Radio button groups**
Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them. This could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

**Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns**
On Windows, a select dropdown has a similar problem as a radio button group. 
Options are selected when a user focuses the select and uses their arrow keys to read through each option

## Feedback

If the change may not be obvious in the UI within the user's viewport, provide feedback to let the user know that the change occurred successfully. If the change occured without a redirect or page refresh, you could use a toast message. If the change occured and the page refreshes or redirects, you could use a flash banner message.

<img width="1787" alt="Screenshot of the user's activity feed page with a flash banner confirming that a repository has been deleted" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868934-b96e6d9d-d022-433f-87ab-189baf1776fa.png">

If an imperitive input did not automatically save, show an error message that explains why the change wasn't saved.

{/*

> TODO: find an example of this, mock one up (if that's allowed), or exclude this visual example

Author: Any ideas where I could find an auto-saving field that shows an error message when the change encounters an error?

Author: Ignore this comment. I'm going to be replacing all screenshots with mockups that demonstrate the issue in isolation.

If the save button in the dialog has a label that makes the button almost as wide as the dialog, you may opt to make the dialog action buttons full-width. If there is a secondary action button, it must also be full-width.

{/*TODO: ![🖼 Include a DO example with image to reinforce message]()*/}

If the button is used to send a message such as a comment on an issue, right-align the button below the text area. This is where GitHub has traditionally placed the "Submit" button for issues and pull requests, and it's common to place a "send" button to the right. For example: iMessage, Facebook (mobile web), Twitter, Reddit.

{/*TODO: Make sure right-aligned send buttons are ok for right-to-left languages*/}
{/*TODO: ![🖼 Include a DO example with image to reinforce message]()*/}

{/*
TODO:
1. Be more specific about when a button should be placed somewhere besides the bottom-right. Define alternative patterns and when to use them.

2. Consider how we might define more patterns to keep the "Save" button easily accessible on long forms:
- add save and cancel buttons on top AND bottom?
- use a sticky header with save and cancel buttons?
*/}

> To minimize UI, some content may be edited inline without taking the user to a separate flow. An input used for inline editing should have a save button placed very close to visually group the input with the button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simplify the interface, some content may be edited inline without taking the user to a separate flow. An input used for inline editing should have a save button placed very close to visually connect the input with the button.
```

Minimize could be confuse with "minimize a window".

![Save button is placed to the right of the input used to edit the PR title](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868914-6af36067-39a6-4fec-adb9-518c5abd595d.gif)

> If you encounter a case where your submit button would not be intuitive or easily accessible using any of the placement options described above, then consider alternatives and optinally propose a new Primer pattern.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you believe your submit button will not be intuitive or easily accessible using any of the placement options listed here, you may consider alternatives and optionally propose a new Primer pattern.
```

> ### State

Reviewer 2: Because state is so small, I'm wondering if you should move it to before placement.

Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

## Explicit saving
An explicit save does not apply changes until the user explicitly takes an action to submit the changes.

Explicitly saved forms can be saved by clicking a submit button or by pressing the "Enter" key while focused on an input.

If you're designing a form, start with an explicit saving pattern. Avoid mixing explicit and automatic save patterns on a single page with multiple forms, and never mix save patterns in a single form. For example: if I upload a profile photo in the "Public profile" form, that change should not be saved until I explicitly submit the whole form.

If there was an error saving the data, the user's data should be preserved in the form and they should be given [feedback](#feedback) about the failure.

> If a user tries to navigate away from a page with a form that has unsaved changes, you can optionally warn them that their changes will be lost using the [beforeunload event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/beforeunload_event). Modern browsers prevent developers from customizing the alrt message, so we're limited to a generic message like "Do you want to leave this site? Changes you made may not be saved."

Author: No, that was a typo. I fixed it when implementing your suggestion.

### Declarative inputs

When designing a form that is saved explicitly, use the following inputs:
- Text inputs
- Checkbox groups
- Radio button groups
- Browser-native `<select>` dropdown menus
- Custom dropdown menus that allow multiple selections

To maintain consistent interaction patterns across your app, do not use toggle switches or segmented controls in an explicitly saved form. They should only be used when they automatically change based on user input.

To build an accessible and consistent app, do not automatically save declarative inputs.

> ### Problems with autosaving:

Reviewer 2: I feel that this section should be in the automatic saving section. I know it's related to why avoid these components when explicit saving, but it feels weird. 🤔

Reviewer 2: I'll need to do another review of this section once it's moved btw.

**Text inputs**
- Users are expecting to set a value and then submit
- Sensitive information could be unintentionally submitted. For example: a change password input

**Checkbox groups**
- It could be unclear whether or not their selections have been saved
- Users may accidentally submit a selection that they clicked by accident

**Radio button groups**
Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them. This could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

**Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns**
A select dropdown has a similar problem as a radio button group. Options are selected when a user focuses the select and uses their arrow keys to read through each option

## Automatic saving

Automatic saving applies changes as they are made.

> Automatic saving should be used when the user expects instant feedback from the change they made. Changes should only be saved automatically using [imperitive inputs](#imperitive-inputs) and for individual settings that are not changed via separate flows.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean imperative? If so, find a replace in the entire doc 😬

Reviewer 2: > individual settings that are not changed via separate flows.

I don't understand what this means.

Author: It means edits that don't bring you into a new page or modal dialog. For example: adding a milestone to an issue.

I'm just removing that part because I think the first part of the sentence covers it.

> If a field is saved automatically, it should be obvious whether or not it saved without using text or visual indicators. A visual indicator for a field that has been "saved" or has an error "error" could be mistaken as a validation status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a form field is saved automatically, it should be obvious whether or not it saved without using text or visual indicators. A visual indicator for a form field that has been "saved" or has an error "error" could be mistaken as a validation status.
```

Reviewer 2: > A visual indicator for a field that has been "saved" or has an error "error" could be mistaken as a validation status.

I'm finding this sentence really hard to parse. Can you reword?

![Screen recording of a user changing their theme in the 'Appearance' settings tab](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868921-afc2b8b8-e39f-478f-b17d-398b790bda89.gif)

### Imperitive inputs

> When user input is automatically saved, use the following inputs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imperative inputs are designed to reduce UI by giving instant feedback. When user input is automatically saved, use the following inputs:
```

- Toggle switches
- Segmented controls
- Single-select dropdowns that are not native `<select>` dropdowns or part of an explicitly saved form

> These inputs are designed to reduce UI by giving instant feedback. The toggle switch behaves like a light switch: the light just switches on and off without you having to confirm each time you flip the switch. Segmented controls and single-select dropdowns behave like a soda machine: the soda comes out as soon as you press the buttons without you confirming which soda you wanted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The toggle switch behaves like a light switch: the light just switches on and off without you having to confirm each time you flip the switch. Segmented controls and single-select dropdowns behave like a soda machine: the soda comes out as soon as you press the button to select which soda you want.
```

## Feedback

> If the change may not be obvious in the UI within the user's viewport, provide feedback to let the user know that the change occurred successfully. If the change occured without a redirect or page refresh, you could use a toast message. If the change occured and the page refreshes or redirects, you could use a flash banner message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the change is not obvious within the user's viewport, provide feedback to let the user know that the change occurred successfully. If the change occurred without a redirect or page refresh, you can use the toast component. If the change occurred and the page refreshes or redirects, you can use a flash banner component.
```

> **A note on toasts:** If your design is being implemented in github.com, avoid using a toast for now. They have accessibility issues that need to be fixed.

Reviewer 2: This should use the note component: https://primer.style/doctocat/components/note

<img width="1787" alt="Flash banner on activity feed page confirming a successful repository deletion" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868934-b96e6d9d-d022-433f-87ab-189baf1776fa.png">

If an imperitive input did not automatically save, show an error message that explains why the change wasn't saved.

{/*TODO: ![🖼 Include a DO example with image to reinforce message]()*/}

## Error forgiveness

For risky changes, provide an option to "undo" after saving.

![Mouse cursor hovering over the 'Revert' button after merging a PR](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150870681-349185eb-342a-49f2-a7d3-6e58132e86a0.png)

Before submitting a form with very dangerous consequences (for example, delete a repository), ask the to user confirm they want to submit the form.

![User flow of a user confirming that they want to delete a repository](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/150868926-f99d23f6-6e31-4333-9545-2625451dae99.gif)

{/*TODO: come up with some helpful guidance on tabbed forms, or just exclude these guidelines until an issue comes up*/

> ## Saving multi-page forms

Reviewer 2: Please a little intro sentence here :)
